Multi-Level Step Functions Trace Merging Instructions (#26424)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/serverless/step_functions/merge-step-functions-lambda.md

This page describes how to merge your AWS Step Functions traces with related AWS Lambda traces or nested Step Functions traces. These instructions assume that you have already instrumented these [AWS Step Functions][1] and [Lambda functions][2] to send traces to Datadog.

> <div class="alert alert-info">We recommend using `JSONata` to define your Step Function payloads for the most complete end-to-end tracing experience. If you are using `JSONPath` to define your Step Function payloads, see the below sections for supported configurations</a>.</div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<div class="alert alert-info">Datadog recommends using <code>JSONata</code> to define your Step Function payloads for the most complete end-to-end tracing experience. If you are using <code>JSONPath</code> to define your Step Function payloads, see the below sections for supported configurations</a>.</div>
```

just some style/markup

}
{{< /highlight >}}

> ## Merge upstream traces with Step Functions and downstream Lambda traces

Reviewer: I think this title works!

> ## Merge upstream traces with Step Functions and downstream Lambda traces

Reviewer 2: @avedmala (sorry for the late night comments).

Since this is the ideal configuration and it uses JSONata, can we make it the top section so essentially any customer who wants to do this can just use this option?

> ## Merge upstream traces with Step Functions and downstream Lambda traces

Author: @sumedham no worries! just moved it up and made some minor fixes

> ### Requirements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<div class="alert alert-info">We recommend using JSONata to define your Step Function Payloads for the most complete end-to-end tracing experience. If you are using `JSONPath` to define your Step Function payloads, see the below sections for JSONPath supported configurations</a>.</div>

### Requirements
```

Node.js (layer v113+) or Python (layer v103+) runtimes.

> Your State Machine Definition must be using `JSONata` as the query language. This can be enabled by setting `"QueryLanguage": "JSONata"` at the top-level of the State Machine Definition.

Author: Added the link, not live yet however

### Setup

On the Lambda Task, set the `Arguments` key as follows: 

```json
"Arguments": {
  "Payload": "{% ($execInput := $states.context.Execution.Input; $hasDatadogTraceId := $exists($execInput._datadog.`x-datadog-trace-id`); $hasDatadogRootExecutionId := $exists($execInput._datadog.RootExecutionId); $ddTraceContext := $hasDatadogTraceId ? {'x-datadog-trace-id': $execInput._datadog.`x-datadog-trace-id`, 'x-datadog-tags': $execInput._datadog.`x-datadog-tags`} : {'RootExecutionId': $hasDatadogRootExecutionId ? $execInput._datadog.RootExecutionId : $states.context.Execution.Id}; $sfnContext := $merge([$states.context, {'Execution': $sift($states.context.Execution, function($v, $k) { $k != 'Input' })}]); $merge([$states.input, {'_datadog': $merge([$sfnContext, $ddTraceContext, {'serverless-version': 'v1'}])}])) %}"
  ...
}
```

The `JSONata` expression merges the upstream service's context with the current Step Functions context object and the Lambda state's input payload.

Alternatively, if you have business logic defined in the payload, you can replace `$states.input` at the end of the `JSONata` expression with your intended value for the `Payload` key.

> ## Merge upstream traces with Step Functions and nested Step Functions traces

Author: Again, some examples for this are
* Lambda -> Step Functions -> Step Functions
* Step Functions -> Step Functions -> Step Functions

### Requirements

> Your State Machine Definition must be using `JSONata` as the query language. This can be enabled by setting `"QueryLanguage": "JSONata"` at the top-level of the State Machine Definition.

Author: This `JSONata` requirement is also mentioned above, are we okay with this being duplicated?

Reviewer: This kind of duplication is fine!

}
{{< /highlight >}}

> ## Merge Any Upstream Service -> Step Functions -> Lambda

Author: Open to a better way to phrase these two sections. For context here are some example cases:
* Lambda -> Step Functions -> Lambda
* Lambda -> Step Functions -> Step Functions
* Step Functions -> Step Functions -> Step Functions
* Step Functions -> Step Functions -> Lambda

The setup is *slightly* different depending on if the downstream is a Lambda or Step Function but I wasn't sure the best way to keep it as one section with a split for the value for the `Arguments` key. I think one section would make sense as both sections have the same `JSONata` requirement that's currently duplicated.

### Requirements
Node.js (layer v113+) or Python (layer v103+) runtimes.

Your State Machine Definition must be using `JSONata` as the query language. This can be enabled by setting `"QueryLanguage": "JSONata"` at the top-level of the State Machine Definition.

### Setup

On the Lambda Task, set the `Arguments` key as follows: 

```json
"Arguments": {
  "Payload": "{% ($execInput := $states.context.Execution.Input; $hasDatadogTraceId := $exists($execInput._datadog.`x-datadog-trace-id`); $hasDatadogRootExecutionId := $exists($execInput._datadog.RootExecutionId); $ddTraceContext := $hasDatadogTraceId ? {'x-datadog-trace-id': $execInput._datadog.`x-datadog-trace-id`, 'x-datadog-tags': $execInput._datadog.`x-datadog-tags`} : {'RootExecutionId': $hasDatadogRootExecutionId ? $execInput._datadog.RootExecutionId : $states.context.Execution.Id}; $sfnContext := $merge([$states.context, {'Execution': $sift($states.context.Execution, function($v, $k) { $k != 'Input' })}]); $merge([$states.input, {'_datadog': $merge([$sfnContext, $ddTraceContext, {'serverless-version': 'v1'}])}])) %}"
  ...
}
```

> The `JSONata` expression will do the following:

Author: The section above had an explanation for the `JsonMerge` expression so I thought it made sense to have some explanation here

If this is too much detail, I think we could also say
> The `JSONata` expression will merge the upstream service's context with the current Step Functions context object and the Lambda state's input.
